Update the rules for parsing subjects (#125)
readium/architecture: streamer/parser/metadata.md

Related Repository: [Readium Web Publication Manifest](https://github.com/readium/webpub-manifest)

## Localized Strings

In many cases, the default context supports alternate representations of the same string in different scripts and languages by means of JSON-LD language maps.
To fill such a map from an EPUB metadata element, proceed as follows:

* Determine the language used in the content of the carrying element as defined in [the XML specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/xml/#sec-lang-tag),
  i.e. check whether the carrying element has or inherits an `xml:lang` attribute. Otherwise, fallback to the primary language of the publication.
* In the EPUB 3.x case, check if the element is refined by some `meta` elements that have or inherit an `xml:lang` attribute and whose property is `alternate-script`.
  For each one, add to the map the corresponding language associated with the content of the `meta` element.

> 

Reviewer: Question: should this be updated now that the decision to use `und` has been made?

Author: How would you update this? Specifying that as a last fallback `null` or `und` is used? (this is equivalent in the Kotlin code)
Or are you talking about removing 

> Otherwise, fallback to the primary language of the publication.

Unfortunately, as far as I know, no decision has been taken about that. Do you have an opinion? (see https://github.com/readium/webpub-manifest/issues/52#issuecomment-601625302)

Reviewer: Ah so during the review of the accessibility parsing doc, @llemeurfr mentioned the use of `und` here for `sortAs`: https://github.com/readium/architecture/pull/135#discussion_r417879475

So I assumed that resolution was made during on of the calls I missed and that this PR should perhaps be updated accordingly. In any case, there seems to be a discrepancy between PRs and issues right now.

Author: Okay, I drafted an update to take into account recent decisions.

Reviewer: Thanks!

When parsing an EPUB, we need to establish:

* which title is the primary one
* the string used to sort the title of the publication
* a language map of the representations of the title
* which title is the subtitle

> * a language map of the representations of the title

Author: That's right, thanks.

When parsing an EPUB, we need to establish:

* the key of the contributor;
* a language map for the name of this contributor;
* the string used to sort the name of the contributor.

### EPUB 2.x

The following mapping should be used to determine the key of the contributor’s object: 

| element        | opf:role                        | key         |
|----------------|---------------------------------|-------------|
| dc:creator     | aut or \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | author      |
| dc:publisher   | pbl or \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | publisher   |
| dc:contributor | trl                             | translator  |
| dc:contributor | edt                             | editor      |
| dc:contributor | ill                             | illustrator |
| dc:contributor | art                             | artist      |
| dc:contributor | clr                             | colorist    |
| dc:contributor | nrt                             | narrator    |

> | dc:contributor | \<empty\> or \<unknown\>        | contributor |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| element                      | opf:role                 | key         |
|------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------|
| dc:creator                   | \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | author      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | aut                      | author      |
| dc:contributor               | \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | contributor |
| dc:publisher                 | \<any\>                  | publisher   |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | pbl                      | publisher   |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | trl                      | translator  |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | edt                      | editor      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | ill                      | illustrator |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | art                      | artist      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | clr                      | colorist    |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | nrt                      | narrator    |
```

Where `opf:role` is the value of the attribute of the `<dc:element>`.

> In case of conflict, `opf:role` overrides the XML element used. So, for example, map a `<dc:publisher>` or `<dc:contributor>` element with `opf:role` aut to an author.

Reviewer: For clarification, is this ad hoc or is there a section of a spec that could be linked?

> In case of conflict, `opf:role` overrides the XML element used. So, for example, map a `<dc:publisher>` or `<dc:contributor>` element with `opf:role` aut to an author.

Author: This is the spec, isn't it? If that's what you're asking, this is not part of the Epub specification.

> In case of conflict, `opf:role` overrides the XML element used. For example, map a `<dc:publisher>` or `<dc:contributor>` element whose value for `opf:role` is `aut` to an author.

Reviewer: Alright, so I now know why that made me pause yesterday. 

I would rephrase the “case of conflict” into a case of extension/augmentation since:

> The [DC11] contributor element is used to represent the name of a person, organization, etc. that played a secondary role in the creation of the content of an EPUB Publication. ([source](https://www.w3.org/publishing/epub3/epub-packages.html#sec-opf-dccontributor))

So in theory, `<dc:contributor> + aut` should be something of a secondary author. But maybe I’m wrong about that, please feel free to chime in.

Then `role` does not apply to `<dc:publisher>`, cf. 

> Extends: contributor, creator

in [the EPUB 3.2 spec](https://www.w3.org/publishing/epub3/epub-packages.html#sec-role). Same in [the EPUB 2.0.1 spec](http://idpf.org/epub/20/spec/OPF_2.0.1_draft.htm#Section1.3.3): “the OPF role attribute added to the Dublin Core `creator` and `contributor` elements”.

Author: > So in theory, <dc:contributor> + aut should be something of a secondary author. But maybe I’m wrong about that, please feel free to chime in.

If it is so, maybe our rule is not founded and we should map <dc:contributor> + aut  to a contributor...

> Then role does not apply to <dc:publisher>, cf.

You're right, indeed.

Reviewer: Given some producers may put several authors in a single `<dc:creator>` so that both/all names are displayed in the UI, I’d imagine that if you can find `<dc:contributor> + aut`, there’s an underlying intent to make it secondary, and it’s a nuance to probably take into account.

But then I guess it could be useful to check if others have any thoughts? Now that we are fine-tuning that, I’m wondering whether `creator` and `contributor` have been handled well enough so far in this doc. I’m not sure about that, since these `roles` may apply to both.

Reviewer: Opened an issue here: https://github.com/readium/architecture/issues/126

Reviewer 2: I agree that `role` should not be applied to `<dc:publisher>`.

`<dc:creator>` and `<dc:contributor>` are unfortunately very vague, `creator` is not as specific as `author` for instance.
I think these two elements are vague enough to ignore the element and override them with `role`.

Reviewer: Given the table has been updated, remove.

> Parse the carrying element as a [localized string](#localized-strings) to compute a language map for the contributor's name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parse the carrying element as a [localized string](#localized-strings) to compute a language map for the contributor’s name.
```

Finally, the string used to sort the name of the contributor is the value of the `opf:file-as` attribute of this element.

### EPUB 3.x

The following mapping should be used to determine to key of the contributor’s object: 

| element        | role                            | key         |
|----------------|---------------------------------|-------------|
| dc:creator     | aut or \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | author      |
| dc:publisher   | pbl or \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | publisher   |
| dc:contributor | trl                             | translator  |
| dc:contributor | edt                             | editor      |
| dc:contributor | ill                             | illustrator |
| dc:contributor | art                             | artist      |
| dc:contributor | clr                             | colorist    |
| dc:contributor | nrt                             | narrator    |
| media:narrator | nrt or \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | narrator    |
| dc:contributor | \<empty\> or \<unknown\>        | contributor |

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| element                      | role                     | key         |
|------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------|
| dc:creator                   | \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | author      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | aut                      | author      |
| dc:contributor               | \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | contributor |
| dc:publisher                 | \<any\>                  | publisher   |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | pbl                      | publisher   |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | trl                      | translator  |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | edt                      | editor      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | ill                      | illustrator |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | art                      | artist      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | clr                      | colorist    |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | nrt                      | narrator    |
| media:narrator               | \<any\>                  | narrator    |
```

Where `role` is the value of the refine whose `scheme` is a value of `marc:relators`.

> In case of conflict, `role` overrides the XML element used. So, for example, map a `<dc:publisher>` or `<dc:contributor>` element whose value for `role` is `aut` to an author.

Reviewer: Same as above.

Reviewer: Given the table has been updated, remove.

> Parse the `contributor` element as a [localized string](#localized-strings) to compute a language map for the contributor's name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parse the `contributor` element as a [localized string](#localized-strings) to compute a language map for the contributor’s name.
```

* the string used to sort the name of the contributor.

### EPUB 2.x

The following mapping should be used to determine the key of the contributor’s object: 

| element                      | opf:role                 | key         |
|------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------|
| dc:creator                   | \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | author      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | aut                      | author      |
| dc:contributor               | \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | contributor |
| dc:publisher                 | \<any\>                  | publisher   |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | pbl                      | publisher   |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | trl                      | translator  |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | edt                      | editor      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | ill                      | illustrator |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | art                      | artist      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | clr                      | colorist    |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | nrt                      | narrator    |

Where `opf:role` is the value of the attribute of the `<dc:element>`.

> In case of conflict, `opf:role` overrides the XML element used. For example, map a `<dc:publisher>` or `<dc:contributor>` element whose value for `opf:role` is `aut` to an author.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a rule of thumb, `opf:role` overrides `<dc:creator>` and `<dc:contributor>`. For example, map a `<dc:contributor>` element whose value for `opf:role` is `aut` to an author.
```

Author: I'm not sure about that. <dc:creator> doesn't imply a key by itself, and we decided that there is no clear distinction between `dc:creator` and `dc:contributor` too. So what is overridden?

Reviewer: We could use something else than `override`. I’m not sure how to rephrase this because I honestly can’t even tell whether I’ve been using those right or wrong for all those years at this point.

And, should we change this mapping then?

| element | opf:role | key |
|---------|----------|-----|
| dc:creator | \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | author |

It was my understanding this is how we decided to handle:

> It's not clear from the table how these elements are mapped when the opf:role attribute is missing. Is <dc:creator> ending up in authors and <dc:contributor> in contributors, like before?

But maybe it should be explored a little bit more – if it’s `<unknown>` should it be a `contributor` object with a `role`?

I mean I’ve just checked and a `<dc:creator>` without an `aut` refine passes EPUBCheck so we must have a default mapping for `<empty>`. But `<unknown>` I’m not so sure now.

Author: > In case of conflict, `opf:role` overrides the XML element used. For example, map a `<dc:publisher>` or `<dc:contributor>` element whose value for `opf:role` is `aut` to an author.

I think this sentence is simply useless with the updated table. All cases are covered.

It's hard to figure out a `<dc:creator>` with an unknown role. Maybe `abridger` or `interviewee` are enough important to be used with a `<dc:creator>` element, but should not be mapped to `author`.

Reviewer: Sounds reasonable, let’s remove those 2 paragraphs then. 

For documentation’s sake, if that can be useful in the future, a few references to [the EPUB 3.2 spec](https://www.w3.org/publishing/epub3/epub-packages.html#sec-opf-dccreator) (emphasis mine).

> The [DC11] creator element represents the name of a person, organization, etc. responsible for the creation of the content of the Rendition. The `role` property **can** be attached to the element to indicate the function the creator played in the creation of the content.

> The creator element SHOULD contain the name of the creator as the Author **intends it to be displayed to a user.**

There’s so much room for interpretation that I won’t firmly state what an `<empty>` role means but well at least it seems reasonable to me that in most cases, it will be the name on the cover and in the page header of a print book.

And thanks to everyone for their patience.

| element                      | role                     | key         |
|------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------|
| dc:creator                   | \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | author      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | aut                      | author      |
| dc:contributor               | \<empty\> or \<unknown\> | contributor |
| dc:publisher                 | \<any\>                  | publisher   |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | pbl                      | publisher   |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | trl                      | translator  |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | edt                      | editor      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | ill                      | illustrator |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | art                      | artist      |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | clr                      | colorist    |
| dc:creator or dc:contributor | nrt                      | narrator    |
| media:narrator               | \<any\>                  | narrator    |

Where `role` is the value of the refine whose `scheme` is a value of `marc:relators`.

> In case of conflict, `role` overrides the XML element used. So, for example, map a `<dc:publisher>` or `<dc:contributor>` element whose value for `role` is `aut` to an author.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a rule of thumb, `role` overrides `<dc:creator>` and `<dc:contributor>`. For example, map a `<dc:contributor>` element whose value for `role` is `aut` to an author.
```

## Subjects

The `subject` of a publication is a key whose value is, in the most complex form, an array of `subject` objects.

> Although each subject should have its own `dc:subject` element, this is not necessarily the case in practice, authors and authoring tools often separating multiple subjects using commas or semicolons in the same element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although each subject should have its own `<dc:subject>` element, this is not necessarily the case in practice, authors and authoring tools often separating multiple subjects using commas or semicolons in the same element.
```

So, if there is a single `dc:subject` that is not refined by any property, split its content at every comma and semicolon and consider you have several `dc:subject` with shared attributes.

> Parse each `dc:subject` element as a [localized string](#localized-strings) to compute a language map for the subject's `name`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parse each `<dc:subject>` element as a [localized string](#localized-strings) to compute a language map for the subject’s `name`.
```
